The Beggar (Нищий). Gaito Gazdanov.

From above, along the champs-elysees where already by four o'clock during this winter time electric advertisements were lit and large cafe displays came to life, came freezing rain mixed with snow, meanwhile below, in the long passages of the metro, the air was warm and inert. In the middle of one of these passages, always in the same place, stood an old ragged man, hat-less, with a dirty-rose colored bald spat around which grayed hairs poked out in all directions above his sideburns and temple. As most of the Parisian homeless he was dressed in something formless. His cape and his pants had such a look, as if they never could have been any different, as if they had been made to fit just so, with those soft folds, with the absence of even the slightest distinctness in lines or contours, as dresses or shirts in which people might have dressed were they dwellers of some kind of alien world rather than the one that surrounded them. Not far from this person stood a blind youth, playing on his accordion hours without end the same melody - Ravel's "Bolero", he stood between two advertisements: on one was pictured a whiskered gentleman, holding a cup of coffee in his hands, the certificate of quality was stamped at the bottom and at the place, where the body of the gentleman was cut off with a straight line, it was written that better coffee does not exist. On the second advertisement a young blond with a blissfully happy expression on her porcelain-rose face appeared occupied hanging linen-sheets of dead-white color on a rope, washed in warm water, into which a special powder had been poured, bestowing a never-before seen whiteness upon the material. The huge white sheets bearing these advertisements had hung in the same places for years, just as for years the beggar had stood in the same place, just as unmoving, as the whiskered man with the cup of coffee and the blonde with her frozen arm on the paper reaching for a bed-sheet. But he did not see the advertisements; more accurately, they did not trigger any kind of reflection in his gaze, and if he were asked, what was on those sheets of paper, he would not have been able to remember.

But no one asked him about anything. Already for many years since the time he had become homeless, one of the particular aspects of his existence was that he had almost stopped speaking entirely, not only because he had no wish to do so but also because there was no need to do so. Words and their definitions, had long ago lost to him their previous meaning, as had everything which had preceded his current life. One time he saw a tossed newspaper: it lay on the gray floor of the metro passage and with huge letters were printed the words "War in Korea". He looked at the newspaper with his faded eyes and did not remember the combination of letters or their meaning. This war, whose events focused the attention of millions of people around the whole world, did not exist for him as there was nothing else at all, except for his personal long-lasting delirium through which he slowly and steadily came ever nearer to death. Sometimes, when leaving the Metro at night and walking along the deserted streets of Paris, across the whole city to the vacant lot on the outskirts, where a huge wooden box in which he spent the nights stood, he would be stopped by policemen and asked, what he was called, where he lived and whether he had any money. Not looking at those, who were asking him these questions, he answered that he was named Gustav Verde and that he lived by the Porte d'Italie. Then he would take out and show a few bank notes from his pocket - always the same ones. The police would let him go and he would continue along his way. Late at night he would arrive at his box, open the boarded door which locked on a hook, bend down, enter and fall asleep right away on the mattress that served as his bed. He had inherited this box after the old man, also homeless as himself, who had built it and obtained a mattress somewhere, died on a summer night from a heart attack and to be discovered several days later by the police, who learned of his death because it was hot and his corpse had begun to rot. When the box became free, Verde settled there and had remained there ever since. The box was saturated with the stench of the corpse, to which he had become accustomed and which afterwords gradually changed, acquiring still newer and newer notes. At first the stench was overpowering; but than it became easier, as if in this poisoned air there was established some kind of indefinite equilibrium between the danger of suffocating and the ability to breath. In this box, from the old man, who had died in it, remained a small mirror of polished steel - everything, which was reflected in it, took on a cold metallic hue; a candle remained as well, a box of sulfurous matches, a basin for water, a small bucket, a jagged shaving razor, a piece of soap and a gray rag which let through light and served him as a towel. All of this, part of that final conception of the world that the old man took away with him into his grave, was on a cardboard box from canned goods, aside from the bucket standing in the corner. And aside from this the old man had had nothing at all.

All of this - the box with the mattress, and the long hours in Metro passages, and slow nightly rambling through the sleeping city, and the fact, that most people he met or that walked by him, obviously avoided him and looked at him with an unseeing gaze as if looking at an empty space, all of this came to him in the course of the last few months and weeks in especially dim and indefinite contours as if through a veil of fog. He had long ago forgotten that it is possible to feel a desire to eat; he never had to starve, there was always money for a piece of bread, cheese and wine; more so, early morning, in the rubbish bins standing in the streets, it was easy to find remnants of food thrown out by housewives; at the central marketplace it was enough to walk a small distance to fill a bag with vegetables, picked up from the ground. Although now, to fill himself he needed very little. He fell asleep and awoke with the same noise in his head, which had began only recently and through which all other sounds reached him only muffled and unclear. Sometimes he had this feeling as if his chest was suddenly grasped by a metal hoop, he began to suffocate and everything that was happening around him sank away in that feeling of pain and ceased to exist. Then he would close his eyes and lean against the wall, almost loosing consciousness. But after a few minutes the pain would fade, he would open his eyes again and look forward dimly at the gray walls surrounding him, at the people passing by, at the advertisements, which he also did not see. He had long ago stopped thinking not only about specific things but altogether; this was the same as with the disappearance of the need to speak. And in this mute and thoughtless life, there remained only changing sensations - noise in the head, pain, sleep, skin rashes from insect bites, the heavy stench of the box that he felt entering it after being out in the open air for a while, cold, heat, thirst.
Then of late something new was added to this, it too was a sensation but a very peculiar one, icy and immobile; and then for the first time in the last years he made an effort of will from which he had grown unaccustomed, thought about it and suddenly understood: the meaning of the noise in his head, the sensation of the steel hoop across his chest. He remembered his age - he was seventy-six years old, - and it became clear to him, that his long life was coming to an end and that there was nothing now which could change this. From that day forward, standing in the metro passage closing, or opening his eyes, he again began to think about that, which occupied his mind so many years ago. This was endlessly long ago, long before, he became like he was today. The question, which stood unbudging before him at the time and to which (he knew it then as he did now) there was no and could be no answer, - it was the question of what meaning, there was in his life, why it was necessary, and from what mysterious source came this long movement, which had now brought him here, into this warm stone tunnel under the Champs-Elysees. Through the noise in his head he heard again the melody that the blind youth was playing on his accordion. Till now he had been so far removed from what was around him that he perceived the music only as a mechanical irritation of his hearing, not giving himself any account of what it was. Now he suddenly recognized the melody and remembered that it was Ravel's "Bolero", which he had heard in earlier times and couldn't stand; to him it always seemed that in this demented repetition of the same barbarian sounds and in their wild and primitive rhythms there was something that disturbed the nerves. "Bolero" caused a revulsion in him that was almost physical. When had he heard it last? He made an effort and remembered that it was long ago at a concert. He clearly saw before himself the concert hall, the evening-suit of the conductor, his bald head, rows of armchairs, a multitude of familiar faces male and female, which appeared before him either in the frames of black-and-white tuxedo's, collar's and ties, or in faded colors of powdered flesh, women's necks and shoulders appearing where dresses their ended, shining with the various sparkles and hues of jewelry. He remembered how the conductor jerked spasmodically to the rhythm of the music and how in the same jerking motion violin bows moved up and down along the strings. He had sat then in the second row, without turning his head toward his wife so as to avoid seeing her face and the expression of cold-stupidity in her eyes. It had been a December evening with the same icy rain, as now, but in the concert hall it was warmer, than in the metro passages. After the concert there had been a night-time restaurant, white wine and oysters, inside the restaurant it was just as unpleasant as in the concert hall and he observed drearily, the tireless motion of the fat fingers that belonged to his wife with which she held the oyster shells, and he longed only to finally be home and to be left alone with the sensation of brief and illusionary freedom. Then having returned home, to the neighborhood of Paris where the villa in which he lived stood he had entered his bedroom and closed the door, - this, in essence, was just like his returning into the box in which he lived now, only with the difference that now he was free.

The blind youth ceased to play for a time and "Bolero" faded into silence. The old man continued to think, still trying to understand something that seemed to him to be exceptionally important, a possibility of some kind of explanation for everything, which kept slipping away from him. He was free now - because he wasn't needed by anybody; he had neither possessions nor money, nor the possibility of having some kind of influence on anyone else, nor the ability to harm or help anyone else in any way, in other words, nothing, which connected him with other people or could establish some kind of connection between themselves and him. He did not even have a name, because people with the same last name as his were thousands and thousands, so he became almost anonymous and the thought wouldn't occur to anyone, that the homeless man with a dirty-rose bald sport and its surrounding frieze of gray hair, standing in the corridors under the Champs-Elysees, and that Verde, who had been at the concert where Ravel's Bolero was played, and about whose disappearance the newspapers had written many years ago, had anything at all in common. No one had a clue as to the reasons for his disappearance and not one of the assumptions, which were made then in the newspaper articles, carried even the slightest relation to reality - suicide, an irrepressible lust for some unknown woman, a double life that had preceded this one, the state of his business affairs. The affairs turned out to be entirely in order, there was no double life, as there was neither lust nor an unknown woman. People that belonged to the same sphere, as him, were unable to comprehend, how a man like Verde could refuse the life, which he had led, to become homeless and a beggar -- without being forced to make such a change for some kind of overpowering reason, - bankruptcy, devastation, insanity, alcoholism. Yet there was no such reason - and because of that, in the sphere of those conceptions, which governed all actions in that world, there was no and could not be any explanation for what happened. There were in this strata, people of so called progressive views; some of them wrote historical or sociological research about the causes of this or that revolution or riot amongst dispossessed people against their fate, and those, whom they considered to bear the fault for it, against the owning class. But to none of the authors of these investigations could occur the thought that it was possible for there to be a voluntary rejection of that very same well-to-do-ness, and the heart of the problematic and impossibility of which, in their opinion -- caused revolutions. And it was just as natural for them to imagine a poor man striving for well-to-do-ness and wealth as it was unnatural for them to imagine the motion the reverse, e.g. a wealthy man striving to be poor. Verde understand this perfectly well. Of these words - wealth, poverty, rebellion, - one could make various combinations; but the main word, was after all the word "rebellion". Verde did not harbor any particular hatred towards wealth and nor any attraction towards poverty or homelessness. Yet his entire life - up until the point, when he acquired his freedom, having rejected that which others considered to be of the greatest blessings, - he had constantly and without word rebelled against the systemic violence to himself that surrounded him from all sides and which forced him to live, not as he wanted to live, but the way he was meant to live. No one ever asked him, whether he wanted to or did not want to do so. That was unimportant, the question did not exist. The company "Verde and Son" existed, which produced precision instruments for metallurgical factories. The firm had employees and workers, starting from the director and ending with the floor-sweepers. And this firm belonged to Verde, first the father than the son. The owner of this firm had numerous responsibilities in regards to various people, all in one way or another connected with him. There was a house, a wife, children, servants, a chauffeur, charities, banking operations, receptions, theaters, concerts, negotiations with parliamentary delegates, meetings, listening to reports regarding the state of various things, the reorganization of one or another department, the necessity to be some-where at some-hour, to answer to some-speech, to speak about economic evolution, ti ride in the train, in the automobile, on the steamship, fly on the aeroplane over-there or over-there, to stop in some hotel, to read that newspaper, to have opinions about certain composers or certain artists - this is was a constant and systematic violence against him from which for a long time he could not escape. He could, of course, divorce his wife, although in his circumstances and in his years, and especially taken into account his children, a grown boy, a young engineer who had already began to bald, and a daughter, a plump young-lady with eyes cold as her mother's and a high-pitched voice, one should not do this - it seemed. He could divorce, although this would create a whole row of new problems. Besides the divorce would not free him from any other obligations, which would all remain the same. During his years of education, first the lycee and later in the university, until he, as his father expressed, did not "enter onto his real-way in life", he almost did not suffer from the systematic violence, although even then he had asked himself the very same question to which he could never find an answer and which had tortured him all his life: what was the mysterious and marvelous connection of millions and millions of causes or accidents that first determined his appearance into the world, and then his life, what was the meaning of it and how was it any different from the meaning of existence for other people? If this meaning did not exist - which seemed most probable, - what was there in its stead? Emptiness? On the other hand if there was no meaning, than it followed, that there was no morality. But if there was no morality, there was still that. - which someone said, that were it not for the threat of vindication, the police and rule of state, and people were to act as they were inclined to do so by nature, than on the earth would remain only ruins, corpses and pregnant women. But then it turned out that morality - is the state and the police, that is the embodiment of collective protectionism, the instinct for the self-preservation of the society, and that so called individual morality - is fear, inheritance, squeamishness, but on no account some radiant and complete reflection of the meaning and purpose of man upon the earth. In his youth when he thought about this, it was in essence a contingent problem. But when his "entry into real-life" occured, from the very beginning it acquired the tragic character, in comparison with which everything else that came before this period, seemed idyllic and happy. How could all of this have occurred?

Verde recalled when he had returned from England, where his father had sent him at the time, as he had reckoned that he should complete his University education precisely there at Oxford. He was twenty-four years old, he was interested in a wide range of things - music, art, literature, philosophy. Least of all he thought about business affairs - there was no necessity. He wanted to become a writer, it seemed to him that exactly that was his calling and he sought everywhere for the plot for his first novel - and only afterwards, significantly later, did he come to understand that under no circumstances could he become a writer, - precisely because, he was searching for a plot. Not finding a plot, he started thinking it was necessary to write something of a tractatus about the peculiarities of English prose but never ventured further into it beyond a few phrases. In July of the next year, two days after he had come south where he had planned to spend the summer, he received a telegram in which it was said that his father was seriously ill. By the time he returned home, he saw only the corpse of his father, who had died the on the day before from apoplectic shock. There was the funeral, speeches, entering onto his rights and inheritance, and then began the serfdom from which it was impossible to walk away, all the endless obligations and everything that was associated with them. A couple months later, he had come to understand that while this was to continue,- he would never have time for that, which is called a personal life. His mother, whose health was deteriorating more and more, spoke to him in a weak voice, saying that the Verde family must have a successor, that he should consider - that life does not wait, that the years pass and so on and so forth, all said, it was imperative for him to marry. And with the same inevitability, with which Verde was present at the funeral of his father who he, in essence, barely knew because when he was a boy he did not see him often as his father was always busy, and later he saw him even less because he was studying and living abroad, with the same inevitability he was later present at his own wedding; with his future wife he was acquainted only for a short period of time and would later ask himself, how all of it had happened. Only afterwords he found an answer to this, in equal degree doleful and unflattering to himself. There was in her, at the time, in spite of the cold-emptiness of her eyes, - the same emptiness, in which later he clearly saw something different, that he was able without hesitation to identify as stupidity, - but there was in her movements, in the contours of her body -- some kind of animal-like and warm attractiveness. That was one. The second was that, from the very first moment of their acquaintance she carried herself with a kind of unwavering certainty in that, everything must happen exactly like this, and not otherwise, as if everything was already clear and determined in advance, and as it was inevitable anyways, Verde unwillingly accepted the same tone, and when he suddenly thought, that he was about to do something important, that he did not want to do at all, it was already too late. Maybe, it was not at all like this but that's how it seemed to him now, and he thought that the memory of a seventy-six year old man could not restore those feelings, which he had felt then, when he was twenty-five years old and when he was different, in essence, a man. Maybe it was not so, maybe, there was after all some kind of feeling, forgotten completely irrevocably, and which was significantly weaker, than for example, the memory of the taste of oysters after the concert, at which they played Ravel's "Bolero". Afterwords he had lovers, submissively undressing when he visited them in the evenings. He knew even then, that not one of them really loved him, and this was understandable: he himself never had an irrepressible attraction for a women, nor the feeling of love, which he had read so much about in books. Instead there was something akin to physical thirst, bothersome, wearying and irritating; and when the thirst was sated, from all this remained only an unpleasant residue and nothing more. Later he understood, that he was too poor in spirit, to experience real feeling, and for a period of time this thought was very unpleasant to him. But later he ceased to think about it.
He remembered, that he had the reputation of being a very kind and generous man, willing to assist all of those around, that might turn to him for help. But this was untrue: he was in essence, neither kind, nor generous. He really did not refuse anyone, but he did so, because he was irritated by the people telling their boring stories about their difficult circumstances, in which he took not the slightest interest. He always hurried to extract himself from these conversations, and willingly gave whatever sum they were asking for. More than that, he really did not begrudge money, not because he was generous but because he did not understand how people could assign to it some kind of special value, which it did not have. He himself needed money only for other people - for his wife, his kids, the employees of his company, always for someone else but never for himself.

Far away, beyond the bend of the long corridor, the last train of the night rumbled. Verde moved from his place, slowly ascending the stairs into the icy wind. Dragging his feet along the cold slab of the pavement, he began again his long journey through the city, to there, where, near Porte d'Italie, the lighted places ended and the vacant lot on which his box stood began. He walked a familiar road, not looking to the sides and continuing to think about those things, which, it had seemed to him, were long ago and irreversible buried and forgotten but had now appeared before him again. When he was around fifty years old and when everything, which he was required to do, both wearied and irritated him, when not even that little remained in which before he had formerly found some solace - a peculiar tinge in the taste of wine in a restaurant, the sensation of a soft bed, into which he lay down late in the evening, the blissful state, when he felt he was just about to fall asleep, - in this period of time he began to read again. Before that, over the course of many years, he had read only newspapers. Now he took up books, those same books, which he was once fascinated by and had read while in University. Now everything was unrecognizably different. Or more correctly, it was not what was inside the books that changed. No, it was much more tragic. For as he read the various authors, he became convinced, that he had lost the ability to understand those motivations and feelings, which had moved the heroes of these novels to perform some action or other. Why did one need to sacrifice everything in their life, in order to gain wealth or power? - Because wealth has no value and power only creates wearisome obligations. Why go to wars? - since all wars are meaningless. Why did Halmet need to kill Polonius? Why did people move towards destitution and death, especially death, which must come anyways, sooner or later, and has no need to be rushed?

Why spend sleepless nights, thinking about, a lover who has left me for someone else, and why try to retain her, because even if one were successful, still her presence than would have no more value? Why jealousy, and mainly, what can one be jealous of? This was the only period of his life, when into being entered something real and actually tragic, because exactly then he felt, that it's all over. He thought about it - then, many years ago, - all day from morning and hardly bear the wait till the moment, when late in the evening he was finally alone in his own room. And when this moment would finally come, he lay down on the bed - and suddenly understood, exactly what it was that differentiated him from the heroes of books, which he had read and from those people who surrounded him. He unwittingly compared himself to a tree, from which only the trunk remains, and inside the trunk everything has rotted, crumbled and died. It seemed to him, that in his current being, there was something as if he carried in it his own death. To live - means to have desires, to yearn for something, to protect something. He had nothing of the kind. He did, it is true, have one remaining desire - freedom. But this also did not have any value. He only needed freedom in order to have the ability to do something, which he could not do with out it. That which seemed to him at the time a yearning for freedom was but a rejection of the multiple obligations, which had borne upon himself, a rejection of the world, in which he had lived and in which he could not find anything, that would have justified or somehow expiated it. He had more than once heard and read about how people started their lives over, began some kind of new, second life. But he did not have any strength left for such a task, more than that, he simply could not conceive of a purpose for which it would be worth to start again at something new, - that to take on again some kind of strife and new obligations. He re-examined - for the thousandth time - those factors, which impel people towards labor or feats: vanity, yearning for wealth or power, love for a woman, love for one's homeland and the desire to benefit it, finally, love towards one's neighbors and the desire to help them or to lighten their hardships. Amongst all these, the only one which seemed worthy was love for one's neighbors. But inspire it artificially was impossible. On the other hand it was just as impossible to continue the life that he had led, in which amongst numerous obligations, the heaviest of all was the obligation to lie to everyone that surrounded him, about everything altogether, no matter whom he met. To lie - meant to pretend, that he was the same kind of human being as them, ready to act the part until the end. It was not easy for him to make the decision, which in the end no one had understood. He did not know, what would become of his life. Yet he knew that he could no longer remain in the world in which he had lived.

And now, crossing Paris in the night, headed for his box, he thought about all of this. It was difficult for him to walk, his ears were ringing, his legs hurt. In the clear, cold air of the winter night the streetlights appeared to him as blurred spots of light. He sat down on a bench and immediately, feel asleep. He dreamt, that he was walking across a snowy field, through a blizzard, that he was very cold and that someone's mocking voice was speaking a phrase, that try as he might he could not understand, but these sounds and these words approached nearer and nearer and, in the last second, someone demanded that he repeat the phrase. He made an effort over himself and finally repeated the words, which he immediately forgot again. He woke up and fell asleep again. Then he woke up a second time, raised himself form the bench and began to walk again, groping almost blindly, in the direction which he knew so well. He felt his feet buckle under him, as if the bones had become soft and the earth was leaving from under them, and yet he continued to walk, at the cost of an extraordinary and subconscious effort of will. It seemed to him that whole hours had passed before he finally arrived at his box and fell down on the mattress.
When he opened his eyes, he saw, daylight coming through the cracks in the boards. He rose, feeling amazed, that yesterday's weakness had passed. He drank a gulp of murky water, which remained in the bucket and went outside. The day was gray, it was warmer than it had been lately. Everything, that he had thought about, he remembered with some kind of extraordinary clarity, and all that remained was to make some kind of ultimate resolution. But this was hardest of all. Despite the obviousness, despite the stupendous distance which separated him - as he was now, - from him that he had been before, it was clear, that all of his life - and then and now - did after all in spite of everything, have some kind of meaning and was distinguished by a certain sequence. In that which he did, abandoning his home and becoming a beggar, chance - about which he had often thought, had not played any role. "Ruins, corpses and pregnant woman". No, not only them. Aside from them would remain people - of the same kind as he: those, who did not have ordinary passions, ordinary yearnings, which determine human life, those, who never dreamt of becoming a general, or a marshal, or an archbishop, or a delegate, or a  banker, or an accountant, or a don-juan, or a hero, or an owner of an useless fortune, those - in who the flame of life barely flickers, pale and withered, which could die out at any minute. There, that was, in essence, that which should have been said about him, and about those like him. He was born a beggar and no fortune - as the one left to him by his father, - and no circumstances, - those, in which he had lived for so long, - could alter that. And if anything in his life was by chance, than it was not that, which was now, but that which was before: "Verde and son".

He reached the entrance to the metro at the Champs-Eysses, descended the stairs, took up his regular spot and again he heard "Bolero". What meaning had his life had? For the first time it became clear: he accomplished his purpose on this earth. Someone's higher will, - if one allows that such a thing exists, which of course, can be considered a hypothesis without any proof but on the other hand it is also impossible to prove that it does not exist, - someone's higher will - had determined his fate: to escape temptations and passions and to live on this earth an appointed span, as a animal or a plant, until the minute in which this life ends.  "Blessed are the poor in spirit..." He suddenly saw in front of himself a painting, which he remembered. He had seen it once in the city of Bon. On it was portrayed the day of the Final Judgement: from a bursting chasm naked bodies are rising into the light; some have already emerged up to their waists and of others only the hands are visible, moving away the earth that had covered their graves.

He stood on his place, in the metro corridor, and soundlessly laughed - for the first time in many years. They wanted to make a respected citizen out of him, a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour? An owner of a business? Maybe a senator? Maybe a minister? And none of them could understand that simple truth, that he was infinitely removed from all of it, from that in the name of which people suffered, accomplished feats, committed crimes, or did shameless things - that for him all of this did not exist. He belonged to a different world. He was not like that, which surrounded him and in this was the meaning of his life. He had not asked anyone for this life. He did not demand anything from anyone - not from the higher will, which he had began to think about in these last days and not from people. But the world, the world as he was supposed to accept it and as it was accepted by others, who found in it some kind of completeness and justice, - this world for him was at the same time hostile, and strange. He had always felt that it was not his place and that there was nothing for him to do amongst these people. He was given life and he did not find anything in it, for which it would be worth fighting, or which ought to be kept, or anything that would have justified some kind of effort. He had agreed to exist, as it could not have been otherwise and in regards to this, again no one had asked him. But to squeeze existence into those frames, in which it was supposed to happen, - that he could not and did not want to do.

Never before did everything appear as clearly to him as it did now. And with the same clarity he sensed life slowly leaving him. It was becoming difficult to breath, the contours of objects began to loose their distinction, the light of neon tubes along the metro tunnel began to turn gray. He felt neither fright or regret: there was nothing to fear, and of course, nothing to regret. In this slow return to non-being there was even some kind of temptation, a sweetness in the irrevocable approach to eternity - to him, who he had thought so much about as a youth but could never imagine. Night came again, and he left the metro, to again make his long journey through Paris, maybe, one of the last, so he thought. He had taken a few steps, and again felt the steel hoop, clamming his chest, with such a merciless force as he had never felt before. He wanted to scream but couldn't, than crashed and disappeared. He did not feel as he was lifted, carried into the ambulance or how he was driven to the hospital.

For a couple days he was in deliruim, as it turned out, that he had, pneumonia along with everything else, accompanied by a high fever. Occasionally fragments from "Bolero" reached his consciousness, through which loud trumpet sounds would suddenly burst, the meaning of which he could not understand. The doctor, who on the next morning approached his bed, stopped, and listened in surprise: an old beggar, who was picked up in the street yesterday, was speaking as if disputing with some imagined interlocutor. But he spoke in a very pure and correct English. When he came to himself on the third day, the doctor asked him:
 - How do you know English?
 Verde looked at him with his expressionless, faded eyes and answered, that he had finished University in England.
 - In England, - said the doctor - so that's the thing.
Late at night, Verde, listed in number fourty-four, awoke, because it seemed to him someone's commanding voice had called him. The sick man rose from his bed, stood with his bare feet on the stone floor, took several steps, fell and died.
But in those twenty-four hours, which had elapsed since the morning of the day when the doctor had asked the patient, how he knew to speak English, to the morning of the next day, the great administrative machine had sprung into action, and that, which up until that point had not been known by anyone, became known. And in one of the evening papers there appeared an article, where everything was explained: Verde had suffered a nervous breakdown, the accompanying loss of memory, and his sudden disappearance. It was suggested that he had spent many years abroad and returned to France only then, when he could remember everything that had occurred prior to his spiritual illness.
After this the body of Verde was requested for by his successors. There was a large, triumphal funeral and Verde was buried in the family crypt. His name was written in gold letters on the dimly shimmering slab of dark-gray marble. The finale of his life, was externally, just as it was supposed to be, and was after all a victory of that world, which he had left a quarter-century ago. It could have been called a victory of that world, - but only in such a case if we allow, that the meaning of the word "victory" transcends the boundary of human life and penetrates to there, where there is no boundary, no life, no meaning, no word.
